README.md, before:

[![Kubewarden Policy Repository](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/badges/kubewarden-policies.svg)](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#policy-scope)
[![Stable](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-stable-brightgreen?style=for-the-badge)](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#stable)

# Kubewarden policy user-group-psp

This Kubewarden Policy is a replacement for the Kubernetes Pod Security Policy
that controls containers [user and
groups](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/pod-security-policy/#users-and-groups).

This policy is used to control users and groups in containers.

## Settings

The policy has three settings:

- `run_as_user`: Controls which user ID the containers are run with. As well as
  the user in the securityContext from PodSpec.
- `run_as_group`: Controls which primary group ID the containers are run with.
  As well as the group in the securityContext from PodSpec.
- `supplemental_groups`: Controls which group IDs containers add.
- `validate_container_image_configuration`: A boolean value that allows the
  policy to validate the `USER` directive in the container image configuration.
  The default value is `false`.
- `validate_only` is used to control whether a policy can perform mutations. By
  setting this boolean to `true`, you are telling the policy to check for
  compliance without making any changes. If a resource violates a rule, the
  policy will reject the request rather than attempting to fix it. The default
  value is `false`.

> [!WARNING] When container image validation is enabled, the policy fetches
> the container image metadata from the container registry. This involves
> network access that affects the policy evaluation time. When the network
> request is particularly slow, the policy evaluation will be interrupted by
> the Policy Server and the request will be rejected. The timeout can occur on
> the first request or whenever the cached response is expired.
>
> If necessary, the policy evaluation interruption can be turned off or tuned
> to accommodate slow network responses. For more details, check [this
> section](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/policy-evaluation-timeout#configuration)
> of the Kubewarden documentation.

All three settings have no defaults, just like the deprecated PSP (also, they
would get used if `mutating` is `true`).

All three settings are JSON objects composed by three attributes: `rule`,
`ranges` and `overwrite`. The `rule` attribute defines the strategy used by the
policy to enforce users and groups used in containers. The available strategies
are:

- `run_as_user`:
  - `MustRunAs` - Requires at least one range to be specified. Uses the minimum
    value of the first range as the default. Validates against all ranges.
  - `MustRunAsNonRoot` - Requires that the pod be submitted with a non-zero
    `runAsUser` or have the `USER` directive defined (using a numeric UID) in the
    image. Pods which have specified neither `runAsNonRoot` nor `runAsUser`
    settings will be mutated to set `runAsNonRoot=true`, thus requiring a defined
    non-zero numeric `USER` directive in the container. No default provided.
  - `RunAsAny` - No default provided. Allows any `runAsUser` to be specified.
- `run_as_group`:
  - `MustRunAs` - Requires at least one range to be specified. Uses the minimum
    value of the first range as the default. Validates against all ranges.
  - `MayRunAs` - Does not require that `RunAsGroup` be specified. However, when
    `RunAsGroup` is specified, they have to fall in the defined range.
  - `RunAsAny` - No default provided. Allows any `runAsGroup` to be specified.
- `supplemental_groups`:
  - `MustRunAs` - Requires at least one range to be specified. Uses the minimum
    value of the first range as the default. Validates against all ranges.
  - `MayRunAs` - Requires at least one range to be specified. Allows
    `supplementalGroups` to be left unset without providing a default. Validates
    against all ranges if `supplementalGroups` is set.
  - `RunAsAny` - No default provided. Allows any `supplementalGroups` to be
    specified

The `ranges` is a list of JSON objects with two attributes: `min` and `max`.
Each range object define the user/group ID range used by the rule.

`overwrite` attribute can be set `true` only with the rule `MustRunAs`. This
flag configure the policy to mutate the `runAsUser` or `runAsGroup` despite of
the value present in the request. Even if the value is a valid one. The default
value of this attribute is `false`. It's important to note that the
`validate_only` and `overwrite` flags cannot both be set to true simultaneously.

The `validate_only` flag allows users to use the policy with `mutating: false` in
the policy configuration. If mutations are disabled (i.e., `mutating: false`),
and the `validate_only` flag is also `false`, evaluations may be rejected due to
the protection in place to block mutations. This can hide the actual rule
violation a resource is committing.

The `validate_container_image_configuration` configuration in the policy
settings is a boolean value that allows the policy to validate the `USER`
directive in the container image. The default value is `false`. If set to
`true`, the policy will enforce the same rules as `MustRunAs` and
`MustRunAsNonRoot` for the `run_as_user`. And checks if the group of the
`USER` directive is in the `run_as_group` range.

> [!NOTE] Container image validation is skipped if the container image is a
> Windows container. And user and groups names are not allowed. The user and
> group should be defined as uid and gid.

This policy can inspect Pod resources, but can also operate against "higher
order" Kubernetes resources like Deployment, ReplicaSet, DaemonSet,
ReplicationController, Job and CronJob.

It's up to the operator to decide which kind of resources the policy is going
to inspect. That is done when declaring the policy.

There are pros and cons to both approaches:

- Have the policy inspect low level resources, like Pod. Different kind of
  Kubernetes resources (be them native or CRDs) can create Pods. By having the
  policy target Pod objects, there's the guarantee all the Pods are going to be
  compliant. However, this could lead to some confusion among end users of the
  cluster: their high level Kubernetes resources would be successfully created,
  but they would stay in a non reconciled state. For example, a Deployment
  creating a non-compliant Pod would be created, but it would never have all its
  replicas running. The end user would have to do some debugging to finally
  understand why this is happening.
- Have the policy inspect higher order resource (e.g. Deployment): the end
  users will get immediate feedback about the rejections. However, there's still
  the chance that some non compliant pods are created by another high level
  resource (be it native to Kubernetes, or a CRD).

### Examples

To enforce that user and group IDs must be within a defined range:

The configuration below will mutate the resource if it's missing the user or group IDs.

```yaml
run_as_user:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
run_as_group:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
supplemental_groups:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
```

Adding the `validate_only` flag to the same configuration will cause the policy
to reject the resource with a meaningful message:

```yaml
validate_only: true
run_as_user:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
run_as_group:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
supplemental_groups:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
```

To allow any user and group:

```yaml
run_as_user:
  rule: RunAsAny
run_as_group:
  rule: RunAsAny
supplemental_groups:
  rule: RunAsAny
```

To force running the container with non root user but any group:

```yaml
run_as_user:
  rule: MustRunAsNonRoot
run_as_group:
  rule: RunAsAny
supplemental_groups:
  rule: RunAsAny
```

To enforce a group when the container has some group defined

```yaml
run_as_user:
  rule: RunAsAny
run_as_group:
  rule: MayRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 2000
    - min: 2001
      max: 3000
supplemental_groups:
  rule: MayRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 2000
    - min: 2001
      max: 3000
```

To enforce that user and groups will be the defined one in the policy configuration,
set `overwrite` as `true`:

```yaml
run_as_user:
  rule: MustRunAs
  overwrite: true
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
run_as_group:
  rule: MustRunAs
  overwrite: true
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
supplemental_groups:
  rule: MustRunAs
  overwrite: true
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
```

Commit message:

docs: Migration notice on README.md
Add migration notice about monorepo and archive status.

Signed-off-by: Víctor Cuadrado Juan <vcuadradojuan@suse.de>

README.md, after:

[!IMPORTANT]
**Notice:**
Starting from Kubewarden release 1.32.0, all code from this repository has been merged into [github.com/kubewarden/policies](https://github.com/kubewarden/policies), which is now a monorepo containing policies.
Please refer to that repository for future updates and development.
**This repository is now archived. Development continues in the new location.**


[![Kubewarden Policy Repository](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/badges/kubewarden-policies.svg)](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#policy-scope)
[![Stable](https://img.shields.io/badge/status-stable-brightgreen?style=for-the-badge)](https://github.com/kubewarden/community/blob/main/REPOSITORIES.md#stable)

# Kubewarden policy user-group-psp

This Kubewarden Policy is a replacement for the Kubernetes Pod Security Policy
that controls containers [user and
groups](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/policy/pod-security-policy/#users-and-groups).

This policy is used to control users and groups in containers.

## Settings

The policy has three settings:

- `run_as_user`: Controls which user ID the containers are run with. As well as
  the user in the securityContext from PodSpec.
- `run_as_group`: Controls which primary group ID the containers are run with.
  As well as the group in the securityContext from PodSpec.
- `supplemental_groups`: Controls which group IDs containers add.
- `validate_container_image_configuration`: A boolean value that allows the
  policy to validate the `USER` directive in the container image configuration.
  The default value is `false`.
- `validate_only` is used to control whether a policy can perform mutations. By
  setting this boolean to `true`, you are telling the policy to check for
  compliance without making any changes. If a resource violates a rule, the
  policy will reject the request rather than attempting to fix it. The default
  value is `false`.

> [!WARNING] When container image validation is enabled, the policy fetches
> the container image metadata from the container registry. This involves
> network access that affects the policy evaluation time. When the network
> request is particularly slow, the policy evaluation will be interrupted by
> the Policy Server and the request will be rejected. The timeout can occur on
> the first request or whenever the cached response is expired.
>
> If necessary, the policy evaluation interruption can be turned off or tuned
> to accommodate slow network responses. For more details, check [this
> section](https://docs.kubewarden.io/reference/policy-evaluation-timeout#configuration)
> of the Kubewarden documentation.

All three settings have no defaults, just like the deprecated PSP (also, they
would get used if `mutating` is `true`).

All three settings are JSON objects composed by three attributes: `rule`,
`ranges` and `overwrite`. The `rule` attribute defines the strategy used by the
policy to enforce users and groups used in containers. The available strategies
are:

- `run_as_user`:
  - `MustRunAs` - Requires at least one range to be specified. Uses the minimum
    value of the first range as the default. Validates against all ranges.
  - `MustRunAsNonRoot` - Requires that the pod be submitted with a non-zero
    `runAsUser` or have the `USER` directive defined (using a numeric UID) in the
    image. Pods which have specified neither `runAsNonRoot` nor `runAsUser`
    settings will be mutated to set `runAsNonRoot=true`, thus requiring a defined
    non-zero numeric `USER` directive in the container. No default provided.
  - `RunAsAny` - No default provided. Allows any `runAsUser` to be specified.
- `run_as_group`:
  - `MustRunAs` - Requires at least one range to be specified. Uses the minimum
    value of the first range as the default. Validates against all ranges.
  - `MayRunAs` - Does not require that `RunAsGroup` be specified. However, when
    `RunAsGroup` is specified, they have to fall in the defined range.
  - `RunAsAny` - No default provided. Allows any `runAsGroup` to be specified.
- `supplemental_groups`:
  - `MustRunAs` - Requires at least one range to be specified. Uses the minimum
    value of the first range as the default. Validates against all ranges.
  - `MayRunAs` - Requires at least one range to be specified. Allows
    `supplementalGroups` to be left unset without providing a default. Validates
    against all ranges if `supplementalGroups` is set.
  - `RunAsAny` - No default provided. Allows any `supplementalGroups` to be
    specified

The `ranges` is a list of JSON objects with two attributes: `min` and `max`.
Each range object define the user/group ID range used by the rule.

`overwrite` attribute can be set `true` only with the rule `MustRunAs`. This
flag configure the policy to mutate the `runAsUser` or `runAsGroup` despite of
the value present in the request. Even if the value is a valid one. The default
value of this attribute is `false`. It's important to note that the
`validate_only` and `overwrite` flags cannot both be set to true simultaneously.

The `validate_only` flag allows users to use the policy with `mutating: false` in
the policy configuration. If mutations are disabled (i.e., `mutating: false`),
and the `validate_only` flag is also `false`, evaluations may be rejected due to
the protection in place to block mutations. This can hide the actual rule
violation a resource is committing.

The `validate_container_image_configuration` configuration in the policy
settings is a boolean value that allows the policy to validate the `USER`
directive in the container image. The default value is `false`. If set to
`true`, the policy will enforce the same rules as `MustRunAs` and
`MustRunAsNonRoot` for the `run_as_user`. And checks if the group of the
`USER` directive is in the `run_as_group` range.

> [!NOTE] Container image validation is skipped if the container image is a
> Windows container. And user and groups names are not allowed. The user and
> group should be defined as uid and gid.

This policy can inspect Pod resources, but can also operate against "higher
order" Kubernetes resources like Deployment, ReplicaSet, DaemonSet,
ReplicationController, Job and CronJob.

It's up to the operator to decide which kind of resources the policy is going
to inspect. That is done when declaring the policy.

There are pros and cons to both approaches:

- Have the policy inspect low level resources, like Pod. Different kind of
  Kubernetes resources (be them native or CRDs) can create Pods. By having the
  policy target Pod objects, there's the guarantee all the Pods are going to be
  compliant. However, this could lead to some confusion among end users of the
  cluster: their high level Kubernetes resources would be successfully created,
  but they would stay in a non reconciled state. For example, a Deployment
  creating a non-compliant Pod would be created, but it would never have all its
  replicas running. The end user would have to do some debugging to finally
  understand why this is happening.
- Have the policy inspect higher order resource (e.g. Deployment): the end
  users will get immediate feedback about the rejections. However, there's still
  the chance that some non compliant pods are created by another high level
  resource (be it native to Kubernetes, or a CRD).

### Examples

To enforce that user and group IDs must be within a defined range:

The configuration below will mutate the resource if it's missing the user or group IDs.

```yaml
run_as_user:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
run_as_group:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
supplemental_groups:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
```

Adding the `validate_only` flag to the same configuration will cause the policy
to reject the resource with a meaningful message:

```yaml
validate_only: true
run_as_user:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
run_as_group:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
supplemental_groups:
  rule: MustRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
    - min: 3000
      max: 3999
```

To allow any user and group:

```yaml
run_as_user:
  rule: RunAsAny
run_as_group:
  rule: RunAsAny
supplemental_groups:
  rule: RunAsAny
```

To force running the container with non root user but any group:

```yaml
run_as_user:
  rule: MustRunAsNonRoot
run_as_group:
  rule: RunAsAny
supplemental_groups:
  rule: RunAsAny
```

To enforce a group when the container has some group defined

```yaml
run_as_user:
  rule: RunAsAny
run_as_group:
  rule: MayRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 2000
    - min: 2001
      max: 3000
supplemental_groups:
  rule: MayRunAs
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 2000
    - min: 2001
      max: 3000
```

To enforce that user and groups will be the defined one in the policy configuration,
set `overwrite` as `true`:

```yaml
run_as_user:
  rule: MustRunAs
  overwrite: true
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
run_as_group:
  rule: MustRunAs
  overwrite: true
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
supplemental_groups:
  rule: MustRunAs
  overwrite: true
  ranges:
    - min: 1000
      max: 1999
```
